Eck 3.5.0 release (#7590)
elastic/docs-content: deploy-manage/deploy/cloud-on-k8s/dynamic-namespace-handling.md

---
navigation_title: Dynamic namespace handling
applies_to:
  deployment:
    eck: ga 3.5
products:
  - id: cloud-kubernetes
description: Use a label selector to dynamically control which namespaces the ECK operator manages, without restarting the operator.
---

# Dynamic namespace handling [k8s-dynamic-namespace-handling]

By default, the ECK operator manages either all namespaces in the cluster or a static list of namespaces defined through the [`namespaces` configuration option](configure-eck.md). Dynamic namespace handling replaces the static list with a [Kubernetes label selector](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/labels/#label-selectors): the operator evaluates the selector against each namespace's labels at runtime to determine which namespaces it manages.

> When a namespace gains labels that match the selector, the operator starts managing the Elastic resources in it. This is called namespace **on-boarding**. When a namespace stops matching the selector, it is **off-boarded** and the operator stops managing its resources. The operator monitors namespace label changes live and adjusts on the fly, no operator restart is required in either direction.

Reviewer: imo we don't need this layer of jargon and this could just be "stops managing" / "starts managing" ... but if we want to keep it 

```suggestion
When a namespace gains labels that match the selector, the operator starts managing the Elastic resources in it. This is called namespace **onboarding**. When a namespace stops matching the selector, it is **offboarded** and the operator stops managing its resources. The operator watches for label changes and updates its managed namespaces automatically. No operator restart is required.
```

::::{note}
Dynamic namespace handling requires a valid Enterprise license or Enterprise trial license. Check [the license documentation](../../license/manage-your-license-in-eck.md) for more details about managing licenses.
::::

## How it works [k8s-dynamic-namespace-handling-how-it-works]

With a namespace selector configured, the operator watches all namespaces cluster-wide and filters the events it receives by matching each namespace's current labels against the selector:

* Events from resources in non-matching namespaces are ignored, and the operator does not reconcile those resources.

> * The operator also watches `Namespace` objects themselves. When a namespace flips in or out of the selector's scope, the operator immediately enumerates the Elastic resources in that namespace and starts or stops managing them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The operator also watches `Namespace` objects themselves. When a namespace enters or leaves the selector's scope, the operator immediately enumerates the Elastic resources in that namespace and starts or stops managing them.
```

* The [validating webhook](configure-validating-webhook.md) applies the same filtering: resources in namespaces that do not match the selector are not validated (admission requests for them are silently accepted rather than blocked).
* The namespace in which the operator itself runs is always considered managed, regardless of its labels.

> ### On-boarding [k8s-dynamic-namespace-handling-onboarding]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Onboarding [k8s-dynamic-namespace-handling-onboarding]
```

> To on-board a namespace, apply the labels that match the configured selector. For example, with a selector matching `eck-managed: "true"`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To onboard a namespace, apply the labels that match the configured selector. For example, with a selector matching `eck-managed: "true"`:
```

```sh
kubectl label namespace my-namespace eck-managed=true
```

> The operator picks up any existing Elastic resources in the namespace and starts reconciling them immediately.

Reviewer: is this true if people haven't enabled dynamic namespace handling yet? I think we need to reorder the sections on this page so enabling comes first, then offboarding/onboarding

Author: Indeed, fixed here https://github.com/elastic/docs-content/pull/7590/commits/873adffdfc44a31493e0c0884649ec82574592cd

> ### Off-boarding [k8s-dynamic-namespace-handling-offboarding]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Offboarding [k8s-dynamic-namespace-handling-offboarding]
```

> To off-board a namespace, remove or change the labels so that the namespace no longer matches the selector:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To offboard a namespace, remove or change the labels so that the namespace no longer matches the selector:
```

> If you installed ECK through the [Helm chart](install-using-helm-chart.md), set the `managedNamespaceSelector` value. That this is a top-level chart value, not part of the `config` section:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you installed ECK through the [Helm chart](install-using-helm-chart.md), set the `managedNamespaceSelector` value. This is a top-level chart value, not part of the `config` section:
```

```sh
kubectl label namespace my-namespace eck-managed-
```

::::{important}

> Off-boarding a namespace does not delete or modify the Elastic resources deployed in it. Existing {{es}} clusters, {{kib}} instances, and other Elastic applications keep running as they are, but the operator stops monitoring and operating them: changes to their manifests are no longer reconciled, and features driven by the operator, such as certificate rotation, stop being applied. If the namespace is on-boarded again later, the operator resumes managing those resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Offboarding a namespace does not delete or modify the Elastic resources deployed in it. Existing {{es}} clusters, {{kib}} instances, and other Elastic applications keep running as they are, but the operator stops monitoring and operating them: changes to their manifests are no longer reconciled, and features driven by the operator, such as certificate rotation, stop being applied. If the namespace is onboarded again later, the operator resumes managing those resources.
```

::::

## Enable dynamic namespace handling [k8s-dynamic-namespace-handling-enable]

The namespace selector supports the standard Kubernetes `matchLabels` and `matchExpressions` semantics, and is subject to the following constraints:

* It is mutually exclusive with the static list of managed namespaces (`namespaces` in the operator configuration, `managedNamespaces` in the Helm chart).
* It requires the operator to run with cluster-wide permissions, because the operator must watch namespaces and Elastic resources across the whole cluster. It is therefore not compatible with the [restricted installation mode](install-using-helm-chart.md#k8s-install-helm-restricted) of the Helm chart.
* An empty selector (`{}`) disables dynamic namespace handling, and the operator manages all namespaces.

### Using the Helm chart

> If you installed ECK through the [Helm chart](install-using-helm-chart.md), set the `managedNamespaceSelector` value. Note that this is a top-level chart value, not part of the `config` section:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you installed ECK through the [Helm chart](install-using-helm-chart.md), set the `managedNamespaceSelector` value. That this is a top-level chart value, not part of the `config` section:
```

```yaml
managedNamespaceSelector:
  matchLabels:
    eck-managed: "true"
```

Or using `matchExpressions`:

```yaml
managedNamespaceSelector:
  matchExpressions:
    - key: environment
      operator: In
      values: [production, staging]
```

Instead of a values file, you can also set the selector directly on the command line when installing or upgrading the release:

```sh
helm upgrade elastic-operator elastic/eck-operator -n elastic-system \
  --reuse-values \
  --set-string 'managedNamespaceSelector.matchLabels.eck-managed=true'
```

> Note the use of `--set-string`, which prevents Helm from interpreting the label value `true` as a boolean, namespace label values are always strings. If the label key contains dots, escape them with `\.` (for example, `managedNamespaceSelector.matchLabels.kubernetes\.io/metadata\.name`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note the use of `--set-string`, which prevents Helm from interpreting the label value `true` as a Boolean. Namespace label values are always strings. If the label key contains dots, escape them with `\.`, for example, `managedNamespaceSelector.matchLabels.kubernetes\.io/metadata\.name`.
```

Dynamic namespace handling is an Enterprise feature. While no valid Enterprise license is present, the operator skips the reconciliation of Elastic resources entirely, emits a Kubernetes event indicating that Enterprise features are turned off, and retries every 5 minutes. As soon as a valid [Enterprise license or trial license](../../license/manage-your-license-in-eck.md) is installed, reconciliation resumes automatically.

::::{warning}
When the Enterprise license expires, ECK normally reverts the managed {{es}} clusters to a Basic license. With dynamic namespace handling enabled, reconciliation stops entirely instead: the `status` of ECK-managed resources becomes stale, and the clusters keep their now-expired Enterprise or Platinum license. In this state, {{es}} blocks the `_cluster/health`, `_cluster/stats`, and `_stats` APIs with a `403` security exception, while data operations (read and write) continue to work.

To recover, install a valid [Enterprise license](../../license/manage-your-license-in-eck.md) (or Enterprise Trial License), or remove the namespace selector so that the operator reverts the clusters to Basic.
::::

> Create the license secret in the operator's namespace, as described in [Manage your license in ECK](../../license/manage-your-license-in-eck.md). This is particularly important with dynamic namespace handling: the operator's namespace is always in scope regardless of its labels, so a license stored there can never be off-boarded together with a managed namespace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create the license secret in the operator's namespace, as described in [Manage your license in ECK](../../license/manage-your-license-in-eck.md). This is particularly important with dynamic namespace handling: the operator's namespace is always in scope regardless of its labels, so a license stored there can never be offboarded together with a managed namespace.
```
